# Another Smpl Compiler

Provides a (somewhat) optimizing compiler for the Smpl programming language
for the UC Irvine CS 241 Advanced Compiler Design class.

For help running the compiler, see

    ./main.py --help

## Structure

The path from input file to compiled machine code goes as follows:

1. input file
2. lexer (provides stream of tokens) and parser (creates tree of AST nodes), see `parser.py`
3. AST, see `ast.py`
   1. Interpreter: each AST node has a `run()` method that implements that
      node's semantics in Python and executes it
   2. Compiler: We produce a single static assignment intermediate representation.
      For this, each AST node has a `compile()` method that appends (emits) the
      appropriate SSA instructions to a given `CompilationContext`.
      
      `IfStatement`s and `WhileStatement`s create new basic blocks in the context.
      Note that both of these statements end in one join block; the _current_ block
      in the context is updated to point to this block. Hence it is safe to keep 
      emitting the instructions following if/while statement in the _current_ basic block.
      
4. Common subexpression elimination, dead code elimination and constant elimination, 
   see `ssa.py`
   
   Common subexpression elimination is performed as statements are compiled:
   The `emit()` method of the compilation context checks whether an equivalent
   dominating instruction has been previously emitted. If so, a pointer to that instruction
   is returned and no instruction is emitted.
   
   The other two optimizations are performed during multiple passes over the IR,
   removing instructions until a fixed point is reached.

5. DLX machine code or assembly generation, see `backend.py` (abstract base class),
   `dlx.py` and `allocator.py`. The machine code is generated by iterating through
   the SSA IR basic blocks in a depth-first manner; the backend in `dlx.py` calls
   back to its given allocator (`allocator.py`) to map the SSA operands to actual
   machine registers and memory locations (for spills).